MSC3983: Sending One-Time Key (OTK) claims to appservices (#3983)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/3983-sending-otk-claims-to-appservices.md

            "ed25519:DEVICEID": "..."
          }
        }
      }
    }
  },
  // ...
}
```

Multiple users, devices, and keys for those devices can be claimed in a single request. This is to
allow homeservers to batch multiple client/federation requests into a single request on the appservice,
if desirable. This is an optional optimization for homeserver implementations. In the example above, 2
keys are claimed for one device.

If the appservice responds with an error of any kind (including timeout), the homeserver uses the
fallback key, if known.

In this case, the appservice is responsible for ensuring it doesn't use a key twice. The
`device_one_time_keys_count` field for the appservice (over MSC3202, for example) would be zero. In
many implementations, when this field falls below a threshold it is common for upload requests to
happen: appservices intending on using the new API should not perform those uploads as it means,
quite simply, not using the new API.

Normally, a client (including appservices) would consider a OTK "used" once it sees it in a to-device
message. Given the claim query is proxied directly to where the keys are generated in this proposal,

> appservices *can* consider a key "used" when it is claimed, before seeing it in a to-device message.

Reviewer: Generally, clients don't need to care about whether a key has been claimed.  They only need to care about whether they receive a message using that key, since they need to remember the private key until that point.  So I don't think this paragraph is necessary.

have already stored the public portion of its OTKs somewhere, we can save a bit of duplication by
having the homeserver delegate [`/keys/claim`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3keysclaim)
requests to the appservice.

In numbers, a conservative estimate for an interoperable messaging bridge (appservice) would be
500 million users. Each user generates between 50 and 100 OTKs, so we'll pick the low end at 50.
That's 25 **billion** public keys. Currently in Matrix, that means the appservice stores 25 billion
keys and the homeserver stores a copy of those 25 billion keys.

This proposal introduces a mechanism for saving the homeserver from duplicating 25 billion keys.

## Background

Appservices can register a [namespace](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/application-service-api/#registration)
of users either exclusively (no one else can register users matching the regex) or implicitly (the
appservice receives events about those users, but can't prevent registration). Implicit namespaces
can be shared across multiple appservices.

## Proposal

For users under an appservice's explicit namespace, if that user has no unused OTKs (excluding fallback

> keys) on the homeserver, the homeserver proxies the following APIs to the appservice using the new

Reviewer 2: One downside of the "no unused OTKs" approach is that the homeserver must:

1. Query internally for OTKs for each user.
2. Then query the appservice.
3. Then (maybe) query for fallback keys internally.

I find it likely that an appservice either always or never uploads the OTKs so steps 1 or 2 are always going to be a semi-expensive no-op. (Either a wasted database query OR a wasted HTTP request, both likely involve requests over a network too.)

Author: The database query I think would normally happen anyways to serve the endpoint - it could also include a condition to get all keys then filter out the fallback keys within the application (temporarily caching them so it can use them after the http hit). The http hit still might be wasted, though this would be the appservice's "fault" for not uploading keys.

Reviewer 2: I guess worst-case is an appservice exclusive user for an AS which doesn't upload keys, this adds an additional no-op step.

Regardless, I don't think this is a big deal, just wanted to point it out.

Author: yea, it's a bit of a waste in that sense, though in theory the homeserver can cache the query or if it knows in advance then it could just not bother with the query (ie: an implementation-specific appservice registration flag to say the appservice will never upload keys worth considering)

Author: a95bf4f55d02853da22c4c9dcb85d751282686dc

  },
  // ...
}
```
```jsonc
// Response
{
  "@alice:example.org": {
    "DEVICEID": {
      "signed_curve25519:AAAAHg": {
        "key": "...",
        "signatures": {
          "@alice:example.org": {
            "ed25519:DEVICEID": "..."
          }
        }
      },
      "signed_curve25519:BBBBHg": {
        "key": "...",
        "signatures": {
          "@alice:example.org": {
            "ed25519:DEVICEID": "..."
          }
        }
      }
    }
  },
  // ...
}
```

*Note*: Like other appservice endpoints, this endpoint should *not* be ratelimited and *does* require
normal [authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/application-service-api/#authorization).

Multiple users, devices, and keys for those devices can be claimed in a single request. This is to
allow homeservers to batch multiple client/federation requests into a single request on the appservice,
if desirable. This is an optional optimization for homeserver implementations. In the example above, 2
keys are claimed for one device.

If the appservice responds with an error of any kind (including timeout), the homeserver uses the

> fallback key, if known.

Author: the server should also fill gaps in the response (ie: appservice misses a key/user) with the fallback key. 

see https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/15314#discussion_r1146977933

Author: 5a4a6c64d1e5b2ee928464f8e84d4f14c24d2b59

OTKs are only used once, however with the appservice serving the endpoint it becomes the responsibility
of the appservice to perform this check.

If the homeserver uses the fallback key, that will be communicated in the traditional ways to the
appservice (namely through `device_unused_fallback_key_types` in the case of MSC3202).

We don't apply this API to implicit (non-exclusive) users as it's possible for multiple appservices
to have a namespace covering the user: instead of guessing or going around to each, we require the
user to be in an exclusive namespace. This guarantees that there's only one appservice responsible
for the user.

## Potential issues

As described, the appservice could be offline or in fact experience a worse uptime than the homeserver.
This new API is optional for appservices: if they don't want to use it (because they know their uptime
will be bad), they can simply upload keys in advance, just like before this proposal. Similarly, if
the appservice is trying to use the API but is offline, they *should* have a fallback key to continue
using as, well, a fallback.

## Alternatives

> No major alternatives.

Reviewer 3: The alternative used by the majority of existing e2be-capable bridges is simply not creating ridiculous amounts of devices. One device with 50 OTKs is perfectly sufficient, creating multiple devices has no real advantages when all the keys are stored in the same place anyway.

I think the primary real use case for this MSC would be bridging OTK claims somewhere else, like for hypothetical e2ee over bridges (which doesn't exist yet and has several other blockers, but this would at least solve one of them). Non-bridge appservices could also have some use for proxying OTK claims.

Author: One large encryption-capable device does tend to mean the puppets can't do their own encryption, though. (Or they have to be the first to initiate)

Which other blockers are you thinking about for bridging encryption?

Reviewer 3: I guess Element's new sharing keys before creating rooms would prevent starting encrypted chats with ghosts that don't have keys. In any other case, the ghost doesn't need to do its own encryption, in new rooms it can just invite the bot immediately to help with encryption. I think it'd be better to find solutions for those few problematic cases than to generate 25 billion OTKs and 500 million device keys.

Bridging without breaking encryption would require user and device IDs to match on both sides because they're signed in various places (like device keys). The encryption scheme and plaintext format of course have to match too, but the user ID signing likely even prevents matrix-matrix bridging with e2ee currently.

Author: I suppose it depends on the kind of bridge. Traditional bridges with a bot user can use the workaround, though bridges which want to allow DMs or similar would indeed need OTKs of some kind. A future MSC would almost certainly figure out a way to give the whole appservice a single device/set of keys, but for now this probably works well enough.

Signing is an interesting point. I'm not sure how it'd immediately be resolved, though this also starts to stretch into domains I'm not totally familiar with. This MSC would indeed remove at least one of the blockers though - others are probably needed to make an encryption bridge function at a larger scale (particularly if the other side isn't using something close enough to Olm/Megolm).

Author: covered in 0b9f6d9005710f0526a1825bae31208dd41d7668 and 8a1dd86c69b32d1717dde8765ca362a363ae9df4 I think

It could be argued that supporting a fallback key for appservices is too much considering their uptime,
however in practice a protocol should not be designed around 100% uptime. This is additionally why the
proposal doesn't suggest proxying device/signing key queries to the appservice: the appservice could be

> down, leaving encryption broken until it comes back online.

Author: While uptime might not be a concern, the appservice might still not want to duplicate even 500 million device keys to the homeserver, so we should probably support that function to.

This sort of behaviour would likely be its own MSC, but when combined with this proposal would mean appservices have an option to upload *nothing* to the homeserver, instead proxying all the requests to the appservice itself. Appservices doing this would be accepting the implicit reliability concerns.

        "key": "...",
        "signatures": {
          "@alice:example.org": {
            "ed25519:DEVICEID": "..."
          }
        }
      },
      "signed_curve25519:BBBBHg": {
        "key": "...",
        "signatures": {
          "@alice:example.org": {
            "ed25519:DEVICEID": "..."
          }
        }
      }
    }
  },
  // ...
}
```

*Note*: Like other appservice endpoints, this endpoint should *not* be ratelimited and *does* require
normal [authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/application-service-api/#authorization).

Multiple users, devices, and keys for those devices can be claimed in a single request. This is to
allow homeservers to batch multiple client/federation requests into a single request on the appservice,
if desirable. This is an optional optimization for homeserver implementations. In the example above, 2
keys are claimed for one device.

If the appservice responds with an error of any kind (including timeout), the homeserver uses the
fallback key, if known. The homeserver additionally uses the fallback key (if known) to fill in
missing keys from the appservice. For example, if the homeserver requested 2 keys for Alice but

> the appservice only provided 1, the homeserver would use the fallback key to fulfill the second.

Reviewer 2: I'm left wondering why the appservice would bother uploaded fallback keys when (to my reading) it could return them directly as part of the response.

I suppose uploading them would still be useful for error conditions, however.

In this case, the appservice is responsible for ensuring it doesn't use a key twice. The
`device_one_time_keys_count` field for the appservice (over MSC3202, for example) would be zero. In
many implementations, when this field falls below a threshold it is common for upload requests to
happen: appservices intending on using the new API should not perform those uploads as it means,

> quite simply, not using the new API.

Author: It's more of a warning to existing implementations of crypto: nearly all of them do a `if (count < 50) { generateAndUploadKeys() }` call, which would be a problem here.

> quite simply, not using the new API.

Reviewer 4: Hmm sure, but what are implementations supposed to do instead?

> quite simply, not using the new API.

Author: "not that" :p 

Normally implementation details like this wouldn't be called out, however given the chance for everyone to have the exact same bug (intending to use new API, uploads keys by accident, new API isn't used), this is called out here.

Normally the homeserver would be [ensuring](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#one-time-and-fallback-keys)
OTKs are only used once, however with the appservice serving the endpoint it becomes the responsibility
of the appservice to perform this check.

If the homeserver uses the fallback key, that will be communicated in the traditional ways to the
appservice (namely through `device_unused_fallback_key_types` in the case of MSC3202).

We don't apply this API to implicit (non-exclusive) users as it's possible for multiple appservices
to have a namespace covering the user: instead of guessing or going around to each, we require the
user to be in an exclusive namespace. This guarantees that there's only one appservice responsible
for the user.

## Potential issues

As described, the appservice could be offline or in fact experience a worse uptime than the homeserver.
This new API is optional for appservices: if they don't want to use it (because they know their uptime
will be bad), they can simply upload keys in advance, just like before this proposal. Similarly, if
the appservice is trying to use the API but is offline, they *should* have a fallback key to continue

> using as, well, a fallback.

Reviewer 4: Who is offline in this sentence? And which API are we talking about? Also, who is *they*?

Reviewer 4: I gathered as much 😄 But I'm still having trouble parsing that sentence in exact terms. e.g. If I interpret "but is offline" as "but the appservice is offline", how is the appservice able to do anything given it's offline?

I'd suggest rewriting the sentence with less implicit words / pronouns.

## Alternatives

Many encryption-capable bridges today can avoid uploading OTKs (and sometimes even device keys) because
they have a bot user in the room. The bot user uploads its keys, but the remaining bridge users do not.
This works if the bridge users don't need to be involved in rooms without the bot user present, though
being able to (securely) DM bridge users is a valuable consideration for this MSC. In future, scalable
encryption for appservices might take the shape of an appservice-wide device of some sort.

It could be argued that supporting a fallback key for appservices is too much considering their uptime,
however in practice appservices are not quite able to achieve 100% uptime. This proposal doesn't propose
proxying device/signing key queries to the appservice for the same reliability concerns, though appservices
which wish to opt to do so anyways could use [MSC3984](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3984).

## Additional uses

An appservice aiming to bridge two different encryption systems might use this endpoint to save on data,
though currently the encryption used on both sides of the bridge would need to be compatible (ie: signatures

> from device IDs and user IDs need to exist). In future, other MSCs might make encryption bridges easier to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
from device and user identities need to exist). In the future, other MSCs might make encryption bridges easier to
```

Device IDs and user IDs can't produce signatures, so the proposed change would make it a bit clearer to me.

many implementations, when this field falls below a threshold it is common for upload requests to
happen: appservices intending on using the new API should not perform those uploads as it means,
quite simply, not using the new API.

Normally the homeserver would be [ensuring](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#one-time-and-fallback-keys)
OTKs are only used once, however with the appservice serving the endpoint it becomes the responsibility
of the appservice to perform this check.

If the homeserver uses the fallback key, that will be communicated in the traditional ways to the
appservice (namely through `device_unused_fallback_key_types` in the case of MSC3202).

We don't apply this API to implicit (non-exclusive) users as it's possible for multiple appservices
to have a namespace covering the user: instead of guessing or going around to each, we require the
user to be in an exclusive namespace. This guarantees that there's only one appservice responsible
for the user.

## Returning extra keys

**TODO**: This is probably best as its own MSC.

Independent of the appservice having `/keys/claim` proxied to it, it may be desirable for both the

> fallback and one-time key to be returned. Servers should *always* include the fallback key alongside

Reviewer 2: In addition to both fallback and OTKs, @dkasak suggested that it could be helpful to request multiple keys at once over the C-S API. In particular having 0 or 1 keys of multiple algorithms could be useful.

I [implemented this using](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/15468) the same unstable endpoint by accepting a map of `{"<algo>": <count>}` instead of a single algorithm. I'm now seeing that the above has an array of algorithms to pass to the appservice instead though. I guess I should consolidate those to be the same though.

Reviewer 2: > I [implemented this using](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/15468) the same unstable endpoint by accepting a map of `{"<algo>": <count>}` instead of a single algorithm. I'm now seeing that the above has an array of algorithms to pass to the appservice instead though. I guess I should consolidate those to be the same though.

The Synapse PR was updated to use the same form sent to appservices (i.e. a list of algorithms).

Reviewer 2: We'll probably want to add something saying that clients may need to deal with getting back fewer than the requested numbers of keys *and* that servers should protect against users request too many keys at once to avoid exhaustion.

the requested OTKs. When using this proposal's new endpoint, the server should use the fallback key
from the appservice's response rather than a previously stored fallback key, if present (if the
appservice doesn't respond with a fallback key then the server uses the stored fallback key instead,

> if known). 

Reviewer 2: This doesn't define if the appservice should be queried for fallback keys if a OTK is in the database.

Author: In lieu of MSC text: the appservice is supposed to be queried, similar to MSC3984 where the server uses what it knows if the appservice didn't provide it.

Reviewer 2: Actually I suppose the text in the MSC is enough as is:

> For users under an appservice's explicit namespace, if that user has no unused OTKs (excluding fallback keys) on the homeserver, the homeserver proxies the following APIs to the appservice using the new API described below:

This would *not* match what you just wrote though and would mean it is not possible for an appservice to only provide fallback keys. I'm not sure if that's a good thing or a bad thing though. 🤷 

If we really do want that then I think we want to use different endpoints or something. Otherwise the appservice wouldn't know if we truly want to query for OTKs or only for fallback keys (it could end up returning OTKs which go unused?)

user to be in an exclusive namespace. This guarantees that there's only one appservice responsible
for the user.

## Returning extra keys

**TODO**: This is probably best as its own MSC.

Independent of the appservice having `/keys/claim` proxied to it, it may be desireable for both the
fallback and one-time key to be returned. Servers should *always* include the fallback key alongside
the requested OTKs. When using this proposal's new endpoint, the server should use the fallback key
from the appservice's response rather than a previously stored fallback key, if present (if the
appservice doesn't respond with a fallback key then the server uses the stored fallback key instead,

> if known). 

Reviewer 2: Is this enough of a change that it need to be a `v4` of the endpoint, perhaps? (Or a query parameter which defaults to the current behavior?)

Author: I think it'd be fine, though open to thoughts. Currently clients appear to pick the "first" key returned, not validating if the extra data is useful to them. In theory this means we can include extra keys with no issues, though if there's a significant need to have it be a dedicated endpoint then let's do that.

We should probably only do this fallback stuff on an `/unstable/org.matrix.msc3983` endpoint though, just in case.

Reviewer 2: matrix-org/synapse#15462 implements this as a separate endpoint.

Reviewer 2: Another piece of this I realized [during implementation](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/15462#discussion_r1174099041) is if we need to also make a change on the federation side.
